{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1038\cocoasubrtf360
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 CharisSIL;\f1\fmodern\fcharset238 Courier;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red81\green13\blue0;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww9000\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sa320\ql\qnatural

\f0\b\fs40 \cf0 1\'a0
\b0\fs32 This letter is from James, a slave of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ.\
I am writing to the \'93twelve tribes\'94\'97Jewish believers scattered abroad.\
Greetings!\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa320\ql\qnatural

\b\fs34 \cf0 Faith and Endurance\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa320\ql\qnatural

\fs24 \cf0 2\'a0
\b0\fs32 Dear brothers and sisters,
\b\fs20 [\cf2 a\cf0 ]
\b0\fs32  when troubles come your way, consider it an opportunity for great joy. 
\b\fs24 3\'a0
\b0\fs32 For you know that when your faith is tested, your endurance has a chance to grow. 
\b\fs24 4\'a0
\b0\fs32 So let it grow, for when your endurance is fully developed, you will be perfect and complete, needing nothing.\

\b\fs24 5\'a0
\b0\fs32 If you need wisdom, ask our generous God, and he will give it to you. He will not rebuke you for asking. 
\b\fs24 6\'a0
\b0\fs32 But when you ask him, be sure that your faith is in God alone. Do not waver, for a person with divided loyalty is as unsettled as a wave of the sea that is blown and tossed by the wind. 
\b\fs24 7\'a0
\b0\fs32 Such people should not expect to receive anything from the Lord. 
\b\fs24 8\'a0
\b0\fs32 Their loyalty is divided between God and the world, and they are unstable in everything they do.\

\b\fs24 9\'a0
\b0\fs32 Believers who are
\b\fs20 [\cf2 b\cf0 ]
\b0\fs32  poor have something to boast about, for God has honored them. 
\b\fs24 10\'a0
\b0\fs32 And those who are rich should boast that God has humbled them. They will fade away like a little flower in the field. 
\b\fs24 11\'a0
\b0\fs32 The hot sun rises and the grass withers; the little flower droops and falls, and its beauty fades away. In the same way, the rich will fade away with all of their achievements.\

\b\fs24 12\'a0
\b0\fs32 God blesses those who patiently endure testing and temptation. Afterward they will receive the crown of life that God has promised to those who love him. 
\b\fs24 13\'a0
\b0\fs32 And remember, when you are being tempted, do not say, \'93God is tempting me.\'94 God is never tempted to do wrong,
\b\fs20 [\cf2 c\cf0 ]
\b0\fs32  and he never tempts anyone else. 
\b\fs24 14\'a0
\b0\fs32 Temptation comes from our own desires, which entice us and drag us away. 
\b\fs24 15\'a0
\b0\fs32 These desires give birth to sinful actions. And when sin is allowed to grow, it gives birth to death.\

\b\fs24 16\'a0
\b0\fs32 So don\'92t be misled, my dear brothers and sisters. 
\b\fs24 17\'a0
\b0\fs32 Whatever is good and perfect comes down to us from God our Father, who created all the lights in the heavens.
\b\fs20 [\cf2 d\cf0 ]
\b0\fs32  He never changes or casts a shifting shadow.
\b\fs20 [\cf2 e\cf0 ]
\b0\fs32  
\b\fs24 18\'a0
\b0\fs32 He chose to give birth to us by giving us his true word. And we, out of all creation, became his prized possession.
\b\fs20 [\cf2 f\cf0 ]
\b0\fs32 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa320\ql\qnatural

\b\fs34 \cf0 Listening and Doing\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa320\ql\qnatural

\fs24 \cf0 19\'a0
\b0\fs32 Understand this, my dear brothers and sisters: You must all be quick to listen, slow to speak, and slow to get angry. 
\b\fs24 20\'a0
\b0\fs32 Human anger
\b\fs20 [\cf2 g\cf0 ]
\b0\fs32  does not produce the righteousness
\b\fs20 [\cf2 h\cf0 ]
\b0\fs32  God desires. 
\b\fs24 21\'a0
\b0\fs32 So get rid of all the filth and evil in your lives, and humbly accept the word God has planted in your hearts, for it has the power to save your souls.\

\b\fs24 22\'a0
\b0\fs32 But don\'92t just listen to God\'92s word. You must do what it says. Otherwise, you are only fooling yourselves. 
\b\fs24 23\'a0
\b0\fs32 For if you listen to the word and don\'92t obey, it is like glancing at your face in a mirror. 
\b\fs24 24\'a0
\b0\fs32 You see yourself, walk away, and forget what you look like. 
\b\fs24 25\'a0
\b0\fs32 But if you look carefully into the perfect law that sets you free, and if you do what it says and don\'92t forget what you heard, then God will bless you for doing it.\

\b\fs24 26\'a0
\b0\fs32 If you claim to be religious but don\'92t control your tongue, you are fooling yourself, and your religion is worthless. 
\b\fs24 27\'a0
\b0\fs32 Pure and genuine religion in the sight of God the Father means caring for orphans and widows in their distress and refusing to let the world corrupt you.
\b\fs40 \
2\'a0
\b0\fs32 My dear brothers and sisters,
\b\fs20 [\cf2 a\cf0 ]
\b0\fs32  how can you claim to have faith in our glorious Lord Jesus Christ if you favor some people over others?\

\b\fs24 2\'a0
\b0\fs32 For example, suppose someone comes into your meeting
\b\fs20 [\cf2 b\cf0 ]
\b0\fs32  dressed in fancy clothes and expensive jewelry, and another comes in who is poor and dressed in dirty clothes. 
\b\fs24 3\'a0
\b0\fs32 If you give special attention and a good seat to the rich person, but you say to the poor one, \'93You can stand over there, or else sit on the floor\'94\'97well, 
\b\fs24 4\'a0
\b0\fs32 doesn\'92t this discrimination show that your judgments are guided by evil motives?\

\b\fs24 5\'a0
\b0\fs32 Listen to me, dear brothers and sisters. Hasn\'92t God chosen the poor in this world to be rich in faith? Aren\'92t they the ones who will inherit the Kingdom he promised to those who love him? 
\b\fs24 6\'a0
\b0\fs32 But you dishonor the poor! Isn\'92t it the rich who oppress you and drag you into court? 
\b\fs24 7\'a0
\b0\fs32 Aren\'92t they the ones who slander Jesus Christ, whose noble name
\b\fs20 [\cf2 c\cf0 ]
\b0\fs32  you bear?\

\b\fs24 8\'a0
\b0\fs32 Yes indeed, it is good when you obey the royal law as found in the Scriptures: \'93Love your neighbor as yourself.\'94
\b\fs20 [\cf2 d\cf0 ]
\b0\fs32  
\b\fs24 9\'a0
\b0\fs32 But if you favor some people over others, you are committing a sin. You are guilty of breaking the law.\

\b\fs24 10\'a0
\b0\fs32 For the person who keeps all of the laws except one is as guilty as a person who has broken all of God\'92s laws. 
\b\fs24 11\'a0
\b0\fs32 For the same God who said, \'93You must not commit adultery,\'94 also said, \'93You must not murder.\'94
\b\fs20 [\cf2 e\cf0 ]
\b0\fs32  So if you murder someone but do not commit adultery, you have still broken the law.\

\b\fs24 12\'a0
\b0\fs32 So whatever you say or whatever you do, remember that you will be judged by the law that sets you free. 
\b\fs24 13\'a0
\b0\fs32 There will be no mercy for those who have not shown mercy to others. But if you have been merciful, God will be merciful when he judges you.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa320\ql\qnatural

\b\fs34 \cf0 Faith without Good Deeds Is Dead\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa320\ql\qnatural

\fs24 \cf0 14\'a0
\b0\fs32 What good is it, dear brothers and sisters, if you say you have faith but don\'92t show it by your actions? Can that kind of faith save anyone? 
\b\fs24 15\'a0
\b0\fs32 Suppose you see a brother or sister who has no food or clothing, 
\b\fs24 16\'a0
\b0\fs32 and you say, \'93Good-bye and have a good day; stay warm and eat well\'94\'97but then you don\'92t give that person any food or clothing. What good does that do?\

\b\fs24 17\'a0
\b0\fs32 So you see, faith by itself isn\'92t enough. Unless it produces good deeds, it is dead and useless.\

\b\fs24 18\'a0
\b0\fs32 Now someone may argue, \'93Some people have faith; others have good deeds.\'94 But I say, \'93How can you show me your faith if you don\'92t have good deeds? I will show you my faith by my good deeds.\'94\

\b\fs24 19\'a0
\b0\fs32 You say you have faith, for you believe that there is one God.
\b\fs20 [\cf2 f\cf0 ]
\b0\fs32  Good for you! Even the demons believe this, and they tremble in terror. 
\b\fs24 20\'a0
\b0\fs32 How foolish! Can\'92t you see that faith without good deeds is useless?\

\b\fs24 21\'a0
\b0\fs32 Don\'92t you remember that our ancestor Abraham was shown to be right with God by his actions when he offered his son Isaac on the altar? 
\b\fs24 22\'a0
\b0\fs32 You see, his faith and his actions worked together. His actions made his faith complete. 
\b\fs24 23\'a0
\b0\fs32 And so it happened just as the Scriptures say: \'93Abraham believed God, and God counted him as righteous because of his faith.\'94
\b\fs20 [\cf2 g\cf0 ]
\b0\fs32  He was even called the friend of God.
\b\fs20 [\cf2 h\cf0 ]
\b0\fs32  
\b\fs24 24\'a0
\b0\fs32 So you see, we are shown to be right with God by what we do, not by faith alone.\

\b\fs24 25\'a0
\b0\fs32 Rahab the prostitute is another example. She was shown to be right with God by her actions when she hid those messengers and sent them safely away by a different road. 
\b\fs24 26\'a0
\b0\fs32 Just as the body is dead without breath,
\b\fs20 [\cf2 i\cf0 ]
\b0\fs32  so also faith is dead without good works.\

\b\fs40 3\'a0
\b0\fs32 Dear brothers and sisters,
\b\fs20 [\cf2 a\cf0 ]
\b0\fs32  not many of you should become teachers in the church, for we who teach will be judged more strictly. 
\b\fs24 2\'a0
\b0\fs32 Indeed, we all make many mistakes. For if we could control our tongues, we would be perfect and could also control ourselves in every other way.\

\b\fs24 3\'a0
\b0\fs32 We can make a large horse go wherever we want by means of a small bit in its mouth. 
\b\fs24 4\'a0
\b0\fs32 And a small rudder makes a huge ship turn wherever the pilot chooses to go, even though the winds are strong. 
\b\fs24 5\'a0
\b0\fs32 In the same way, the tongue is a small thing that makes grand speeches.\
But a tiny spark can set a great forest on fire. 
\b\fs24 6\'a0
\b0\fs32 And the tongue is a flame of fire. It is a whole world of wickedness, corrupting your entire body. It can set your whole life on fire, for it is set on fire by hell itself.
\b\fs20 [\cf2 b\cf0 ]
\b0\fs32 \

\b\fs24 7\'a0
\b0\fs32 People can tame all kinds of animals, birds, reptiles, and fish, 
\b\fs24 8\'a0
\b0\fs32 but no one can tame the tongue. It is restless and evil, full of deadly poison. 
\b\fs24 9\'a0
\b0\fs32 Sometimes it praises our Lord and Father, and sometimes it curses those who have been made in the image of God. 
\b\fs24 10\'a0
\b0\fs32 And so blessing and cursing come pouring out of the same mouth. Surely, my brothers and sisters, this is not right! 
\b\fs24 11\'a0
\b0\fs32 Does a spring of water bubble out with both fresh water and bitter water? 
\b\fs24 12\'a0
\b0\fs32 Does a fig tree produce olives, or a grapevine produce figs? No, and you can\'92t draw fresh water from a salty spring.
\b\fs20 [\cf2 c\cf0 ]
\b0\fs32 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa320\ql\qnatural

\b\fs34 \cf0 True Wisdom Comes from God\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa320\ql\qnatural

\fs24 \cf0 13\'a0
\b0\fs32 If you are wise and understand God\'92s ways, prove it by living an honorable life, doing good works with the humility that comes from wisdom. 
\b\fs24 14\'a0
\b0\fs32 But if you are bitterly jealous and there is selfish ambition in your heart, don\'92t cover up the truth with boasting and lying. 
\b\fs24 15\'a0
\b0\fs32 For jealousy and selfishness are not God\'92s kind of wisdom. Such things are earthly, unspiritual, and demonic. 
\b\fs24 16\'a0
\b0\fs32 For wherever there is jealousy and selfish ambition, there you will find disorder and evil of every kind.\

\b\fs24 17\'a0
\b0\fs32 But the wisdom from above is first of all pure. It is also peace loving, gentle at all times, and willing to yield to others. It is full of mercy and good deeds. It shows no favoritism and is always sincere. 
\b\fs24 18\'a0
\b0\fs32 And those who are peacemakers will plant seeds of peace and reap a harvest of righteousness.
\b\fs40 \
4\'a0
\b0\fs32 What is causing the quarrels and fights among you? Don\'92t they come from the evil desires at war within you? 
\b\fs24 2\'a0
\b0\fs32 You want what you don\'92t have, so you scheme and kill to get it. You are jealous of what others have, but you can\'92t get it, so you fight and wage war to take it away from them. Yet you don\'92t have what you want because you don\'92t ask God for it. 
\b\fs24 3\'a0
\b0\fs32 And even when you ask, you don\'92t get it because your motives are all wrong\'97you want only what will give you pleasure.\

\b\fs24 4\'a0
\b0\fs32 You adulterers!
\b\fs20 [\cf2 a\cf0 ]
\b0\fs32  Don\'92t you realize that friendship with the world makes you an enemy of God? I say it again: If you want to be a friend of the world, you make yourself an enemy of God. 
\b\fs24 5\'a0
\b0\fs32 What do you think the Scriptures mean when they say that the spirit God has placed within us is filled with envy?
\b\fs20 [\cf2 b\cf0 ]
\b0\fs32  
\b\fs24 6\'a0
\b0\fs32 But he gives us even more grace to stand against such evil desires. As the Scriptures say,\
\pard\pardeftab720\ql\qnatural
\cf0 \'93God opposes the proud\uc0\u8232 
\f1\fs14 \'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0
\f0\fs32 but favors the humble.\'94
\b\fs20 [\cf2 c\cf0 ]
\b0\fs32 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa320\ql\qnatural

\b\fs24 \cf0 7\'a0
\b0\fs32 So humble yourselves before God. Resist the devil, and he will flee from you. 
\b\fs24 8\'a0
\b0\fs32 Come close to God, and God will come close to you. Wash your hands, you sinners; purify your hearts, for your loyalty is divided between God and the world. 
\b\fs24 9\'a0
\b0\fs32 Let there be tears for what you have done. Let there be sorrow and deep grief. Let there be sadness instead of laughter, and gloom instead of joy. 
\b\fs24 10\'a0
\b0\fs32 Humble yourselves before the Lord, and he will lift you up in honor.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa320\ql\qnatural

\b\fs34 \cf0 Warning against Judging Others\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa320\ql\qnatural

\fs24 \cf0 11\'a0
\b0\fs32 Don\'92t speak evil against each other, dear brothers and sisters.
\b\fs20 [\cf2 d\cf0 ]
\b0\fs32  If you criticize and judge each other, then you are criticizing and judging God\'92s law. But your job is to obey the law, not to judge whether it applies to you. 
\b\fs24 12\'a0
\b0\fs32 God alone, who gave the law, is the Judge. He alone has the power to save or to destroy. So what right do you have to judge your neighbor?\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa320\ql\qnatural

\b\fs34 \cf0 Warning about Self-Confidence\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa320\ql\qnatural

\fs24 \cf0 13\'a0
\b0\fs32 Look here, you who say, \'93Today or tomorrow we are going to a certain town and will stay there a year. We will do business there and make a profit.\'94 
\b\fs24 14\'a0
\b0\fs32 How do you know what your life will be like tomorrow? Your life is like the morning fog\'97it\'92s here a little while, then it\'92s gone. 
\b\fs24 15\'a0
\b0\fs32 What you ought to say is, \'93If the Lord wants us to, we will live and do this or that.\'94 
\b\fs24 16\'a0
\b0\fs32 Otherwise you are boasting about your own plans, and all such boasting is evil.\

\b\fs24 17\'a0
\b0\fs32 Remember, it is sin to know what you ought to do and then not do it.
\b\fs40 \
5\'a0
\b0\fs32 Look here, you rich people: Weep and groan with anguish because of all the terrible troubles ahead of you. 
\b\fs24 2\'a0
\b0\fs32 Your wealth is rotting away, and your fine clothes are moth-eaten rags. 
\b\fs24 3\'a0
\b0\fs32 Your gold and silver have become worthless. The very wealth you were counting on will eat away your flesh like fire. This treasure you have accumulated will stand as evidence against you on the day of judgment. 
\b\fs24 4\'a0
\b0\fs32 For listen! Hear the cries of the field workers whom you have cheated of their pay. The wages you held back cry out against you. The cries of those who harvest your fields have reached the ears of the Lord of Heaven\'92s Armies.\

\b\fs24 5\'a0
\b0\fs32 You have spent your years on earth in luxury, satisfying your every desire. You have fattened yourselves for the day of slaughter. 
\b\fs24 6\'a0
\b0\fs32 You have condemned and killed innocent people,
\b\fs20 [\cf2 a\cf0 ]
\b0\fs32  who do not resist you.
\b\fs20 [\cf2 b\cf0 ]
\b0\fs32 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa320\ql\qnatural

\b\fs34 \cf0 Patience and Endurance\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa320\ql\qnatural

\fs24 \cf0 7\'a0
\b0\fs32 Dear brothers and sisters,
\b\fs20 [\cf2 c\cf0 ]
\b0\fs32  be patient as you wait for the Lord\'92s return. Consider the farmers who patiently wait for the rains in the fall and in the spring. They eagerly look for the valuable harvest to ripen. 
\b\fs24 8\'a0
\b0\fs32 You, too, must be patient. Take courage, for the coming of the Lord is near.\

\b\fs24 9\'a0
\b0\fs32 Don\'92t grumble about each other, brothers and sisters, or you will be judged. For look\'97the Judge is standing at the door!\

\b\fs24 10\'a0
\b0\fs32 For examples of patience in suffering, dear brothers and sisters, look at the prophets who spoke in the name of the Lord. 
\b\fs24 11\'a0
\b0\fs32 We give great honor to those who endure under suffering. For instance, you know about Job, a man of great endurance. You can see how the Lord was kind to him at the end, for the Lord is full of tenderness and mercy.\

\b\fs24 12\'a0
\b0\fs32 But most of all, my brothers and sisters, never take an oath, by heaven or earth or anything else. Just say a simple yes or no, so that you will not sin and be condemned.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa320\ql\qnatural

\b\fs34 \cf0 The Power of Prayer\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa320\ql\qnatural

\fs24 \cf0 13\'a0
\b0\fs32 Are any of you suffering hardships? You should pray. Are any of you happy? You should sing praises. 
\b\fs24 14\'a0
\b0\fs32 Are any of you sick? You should call for the elders of the church to come and pray over you, anointing you with oil in the name of the Lord. 
\b\fs24 15\'a0
\b0\fs32 Such a prayer offered in faith will heal the sick, and the Lord will make you well. And if you have committed any sins, you will be forgiven.\

\b\fs24 16\'a0
\b0\fs32 Confess your sins to each other and pray for each other so that you may be healed. The earnest prayer of a righteous person has great power and produces wonderful results. 
\b\fs24 17\'a0
\b0\fs32 Elijah was as human as we are, and yet when he prayed earnestly that no rain would fall, none fell for three and a half years! 
\b\fs24 18\'a0
\b0\fs32 Then, when he prayed again, the sky sent down rain and the earth began to yield its crops.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa320\ql\qnatural

\b\fs34 \cf0 Restore Wandering Believers\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa320\ql\qnatural

\fs24 \cf0 19\'a0
\b0\fs32 My dear brothers and sisters, if someone among you wanders away from the truth and is brought back, 
\b\fs24 20\'a0
\b0\fs32 you can be sure that whoever brings the sinner back will save that person from death and bring about the forgiveness of many sins.}