Some notes From Hugh on the Google Keyboard Computer:
1. This is pretty cool but not powerful enough (Yet).
2. generally there these charts go left to right following the fingers. Consider present alterations. Right handnot yet complted.
3. instead of hard coding the alpha character in the "=LEN(B5)-LEN(SUBSTITUTE(B5,"a",""))" the character should be set to a variable. Like the value of the cell below it (or to the left or right of it) following recommendation #2. See G6 and the ensuing cells for an example. The reason for this is so that a new set of variables could be quickly imported.
4. the cell below (or to the left or right of the Quantitiative Frequency) should be set to a variable to match the keyboard. As in the case in cell Y5 This could be done in any one of several ways, not sure what the easiest way is: Characters in a single string, one string per state, No strings and only tables with a key-value pair.
5. More states are needed: Shift, Shift+alt, Alt, base, and up to 6 deadkey states. It remaines an open question on how these are best encoded. See blue table for concievable options
6. all keys need to be represented, this includes shift, and number keys.
7. Currently only lower case is being counted. This is an exact match. This is ok if shift state is implimented independently.
8. Distance: yes this is important. But how it is counted varries widely. I have seen it counted using 19mm center offsets on keys (though some tools/studies use 18mm so this variable needs to be easily adjusted) and the Pagroean theorm. A2+B2=C2 (2=squared) see: http://patorjk.com/blog/2009/07/12/typing-distance/ but he then computes back to pixels and if I am not mistaken pixel dinsity is a variable for everyone based on screen used... so I am not sure that the pixel/per inch is accurate. Another source of variation is when to count a distance and where to start counting. My fingers actually never go back to home row. They sorta hang in the air. So, is lateral distance counted or is only vertical distance counted? see the following discussion: http://colemak.com/Compare